# Moore_etal_MEA
Collection of code and scripts for Moore et all 2025

Deep brain stimulation is thought to remodel neural circuits on time scales from minutes to months depending on the target brain region, stimulation parameters, and therapeutic goals. Despite the clinical importance and potential of neuromodulation therapies, the mechanisms underlying the effect of stimulation on brain activity and cognition are not understood. It has been shown that different types of neurons are more amenable to modulation via stimulation than others, and that stimulation parameters can be fine-tuned to affect specific neuronal populations. Recently, stimulation of the lateral temporal cortex during specific oscillatory biomarkers of poor memory encoding has been explored as a means of enhancing cognitive performance. This, combined with the fact that stimulation induces cell type-specific gene networks which support learning and memory, indicates that the future of neuromodulation strategies for cognition should focus on targetable electrophysiological and genetic signatures in specific neuronal populations. Ultimately, these molecular mechanisms have not yet been probed in the context of the human brain due to the challenges of procuring, maintaining, and executing relevant experimental paradigms healthy, living tissue.

To overcome these hurdles, we have developed an ex vivo approach utilizing microelectrode array (MEA) stimulation and recording of resected temporal cortex specimens from human neurosurgical patients. The application of parallel snRNA-seq and snATAC-seq enabled us to link stimulation-induced electrophysiological, gene expression, and chromatin structure changes at a single cell resolution. To understand how our results may translate to the in vivo setting, we conducted snRNA-seq on stimulated and non-stimulated prefrontal cortex tissue from a separate group of patients undergoing resections requiring intraoperative cortical mapping.

We first identified nearly 500 individual neurons in the MEA recordings and found evidence that pyramidal cells are more likely to exhibit an increase in firing rate in response to stimulation than interneurons. To understand how stimulation affects local cortical circuit activity, we applied a robust method for identifying neuronal assemblies which are thought to underly complex behavioral processes in vivo including memory. We show that stimulation strengthens assembly activation and the ability of assemblies to recruit new member neurons, indicating that stimulation enables memory-relevant circuit remodeling. From the multiome data, we uncovered stimulation-sensitive cell type-specific gene regulatory networks involving wide swathes of activity regulated genes and synaptic genes. These results indicate a preferential activation of specific types of excitatory neurons found in deep cortical layers, and also support the hypothesis that astrocytes play a role in the effects of stimulation. Finally, we uncovered thousands of differentially expressed genes in the in vivo stimulation experiments. The overlapping genes between in vivo and MEA stimulated tissue indicate that deep layer excitatory neurons play important roles in both paradigms that should be considered in the development of novel therapies for cognition.

We conclude that the overall impact of stimulation on the human temporal cortex is an activation of specific excitatory neuron populations and cell assemblies, and that these changes are supported by the activation of gene regulatory networks involving synaptic genes. We find evidence that these results can be translated to an in vivo paradigm, where we also see the activation of deep layer excitatory neurons over other neuron types, evidenced by enhanced immediate early gene expression. Ultimately, we are poised to identify targetable cell type specific electrophysiological and genetic signatures that may be harnessed for therapeutic benefit in future neuromodulation strategies.
